“One encounters in any ordinary day far more real difficulty than one confronts in the most ‘intellectual’ piece of work. Why is it believed that poetry, prose, painting, music should be less than we are?”
- Geoffrey Hill, The Paris Review
In 1942, T. S Eliot gave a lecture at the University of Glasgow where he declared “One of the most obscure of modern poets was the French writer Stephane Mallarmé” (Eliot 14-15). Twenty years prior to this Eliot published The Waste Land and became, by popular opinion, “the century’s most famous poet…because his prestige was founded on poetry notorious for its difficulty” (Raine xi). Since this, the two have shared the epithet ‘difficult’, and circulated in many of the same critical contexts. In The Obscurity of the Poet, Randall Jarrell writes “it is hard to be much more difficult than Mallarmé”, and in the same piece describes the average reader’s reaction to Eliot, “even those who admired it most, found it impossible to understand; that it was hopelessly obscure seemed to them self-evident.” (Jarrell 19). The two have been discussed together in the role of French 19th century symbolism in Eliot’s work, however the bulk of this has focussed on Jules Laforgue and his “strong influence on T.S Eliot” (Rees 326). Therefore, as of yet, work specifically comparing Mallarmé and Eliot has been scarce. This essay crosses the channel to examine the relationship between the two, focusing particularly on the quality that unites them – difficulty. Using examples of their most popular and most difficult works, Mallarmé’s L’Apres-midi d’un Faun (attributed by Paul Valéry to be “the best poem in French literature” (Cohn 13)) and Eliot’s The Waste Land (the “poem of the century” (Brooker 3), I argue that both share similarities. Unpicking the difficulty in both poems, it becomes clear that certain aspects of Mallarmé’s difficult style, namely the gaps in the narrative, ambiguous narrative voice, temporal confusion, and musical allusion, also feature prominently in Eliot and constitute a large part of the difficulty of The Waste Land. Furthering this, I argue that these elements are exaggerated by Eliot to create a work which is self-consciously difficult, bringing difficulty into the forefront in both his literature and critical discussion. This concretises Mallarmé’s much celebrated “initiatory modernism” style (Code 73), and ultimately marks modernism’s move towards Hill’s idea that “art has a right—not an obligation—to be difficult if it wishes.” (Hill). 
To begin, it is useful to establish the term difficult and its understanding in a literary context. The definition according to the OED, “Of a thing: requiring much effort or skill to deal with; presenting obstacles to progress or accomplishment” requires adjusting when applied to poetry (OED). The idea of poetry having something that a reader actively “deal[s]” with, or being something with an acute goal is not appropriate. Thus, in the context of this essay the idea of difficulty is skewed more towards the techniques of writing poetry. When a poet or poem is deemed difficult it is usually because of the unusual techniques which have formulated the poem. These are counter to the conventional techniques of poetry, and are exposed particularly during the process of translation. For that reason, J.H Prynne’s definition from Difficulties in the Translation of “Difficult Poems” is more relevant to this essay. He writes that “When poetry is difficult this is more likely because the language and structure of its presentation are unusually cross-linked or fragmented, or dense with ideas and response-patterns that challenge the reader’s powers of recognition” (Prynne 153).  These lead to Prynne’s description of the modern poem, “In difficult modernist poetry there can be obscure and complex aspects relating to thoughts and ideas, to imagery and structure, to condensed or broken linkages, and to embedded references to other texts or works” (Prynn 153). These are the criteria used in this essay, and the elements defined as difficult. The gaps in the narrative are “broken linkages”, the polyvocal nature, and temporal ambiguities of the poems a “cross-link[ing]” of structures, and the musical allusion an “embedded reference” to another work (Prynne 153). 
Mallarmé’s narrative takes its roots in the “arts of tangential thinking and oblique suggestive utterance” of his predecessors Baudelaire, Nerval and Hugo, and this forms the first component of his difficulty (Bowie 4). Assuming the conventional narrative is “An account of a series of events, facts, etc., given in order and with the establishing of connections between them” (OED), Mallarmé’s narrative is unconventional in its counter-chronological ordering and lack of established connections. As Symons writes, “Stéphane Mallarmé was one of those who love literature too much to write it except by fragments” (Symons 61), and the distance between these fragments results in difficulty for the reader. The great “gaps, elisions, discrepancies, and unannounced shifts of register” mark the spaces where the connections between the fragments lie, leaving the reader “with much further thinking to perform” (Bowie 17). Such fragments and narrative gaps can be seen in L’Apres-midi d’un Faun where the spaces in the narrative are mirrored spatially in the text. 
Quand tonne un somme triste où s’épuise la flamme.
Je tiens la reine!
                                        
                                                         Ô sûr châtiment..
 
                                                                                               Non, mais l’âme         
              De paroles vacante et ce corps alourdi 
                                                                                                                    (Mallarmé 104-105)
Here, the three short lines form a pattern: all three are a similar length and appear at regular descending intervals on the page. Thus, although keeping the units separate and tangential, Mallarmé suggests a unifying connection. The fragments are disconnected from each other, yet simultaneously connected, the ellipsis finishing the second fragment “Ô sûr châtiment..” suggesting both a ‘tailing off’ of the current thought, and a lead in to the next “Non, mais l’âme” (Mallarmé 104). A similar kind of ambiguous meaning is created in the fragmented syntax. The line break following “l’âme” causes an unexpected hiatus in the sentence “Non, mais l’âme de paroles vacante et ce corps alourdi…” (Mallarmé 25). This ultimately has the effect of creating a dual meaning: the unit “Non, mais l’âme” can belong to the previous line, referring to “le châtiment”, translated into English as ‘the punishment is certain…but the soul [prevents this]’. It can also belong to the line that follows, completing the construction “l’âme de paroles vacante”, translating as “No, but the soul void of words” (Blackmore 283). Thus, Mallarmé’s tangential, and syntactically ambiguous style leaves the fragments “free to develop new relationships of affinity or contrast amongst themselves” (Bowie 7). In doing so, the conventional line of narrative is disrupted, and extracting a single meaning from the poem is difficult. 
 This draws the first parallel to Eliot. The Waste Land is self-consciously fragmentary. This is to the extent that Eliot forewarns in “The Burial of the Dead”, “You cannot say, or guess, for you know only/A heap of broken images” (Eliot 53), and concludes in “What the Thunder Said” “These fragments I have shored against my ruins” (Eliot 69), more explicitly written as “These fragments I have spelt in my ruins” in an earlier transcript (Bradbrook 21). Not only is Eliot’s fragmentary style akin to Mallarmé’s, but the fragments themselves are often Mallarméan in their tangential nature:
From doors of mudcracked houses
                                               
                                                                If there were water

         And no rock
         If there were rock
         And also water
         And water                                                                     (Eliot 345-350)
Here, the syntactic construction “If there were water” is left unresolved, and instead leads to a tangent cycling through variations of “if there were rock”, “And water” (Eliot 350). This forms a 13 line tangential stanza, in which a second tangent is formed, “If there were the sound of water only” (Eliot 353). This is similarly unresolved, with no finishing ‘then…’ clause. Instead, both tangents are brought to a close with the dismissal “But there is no water” (Eliot 359). At this point the stanza ends, and the following text returns to its left-aligned positioning (Eliot 360). This therefore is reminiscent of Mallarmé’s aforementioned tangent “Ô sûr châtiment..”, and its dismissal “Non, mais l’âme” (Mallarme 104).  However, in Eliot’s case, this is exaggerated to form an entire tangential section of the poem.  Both Mallarmé and Eliot’s narrative tangents are positioned tangentially spatially to the previous stanza, both are suggested to be incomplete, and both constitute an element of difficulty.  
A second element of Mallarmé’s difficulty is his poly-vocal narrator. The poem begins by outlining that the poem is an “églogve” spoken entirely by “LE FAVN” (Mallarmé 22). However, throughout the monologue various other voices are entwined and intersected with the Faun’s. This is firstly noticeable in the second stanza of the poem, where the Faun is referred to in the second person: “ou si les femmes dont tu gloses/Figurent un souhait de tes sens fabuleux!”, and “dis-tu qu’elle contraste/Comme brise du jour chaude dans ta toison?” (Mallarme 8-9, 12-13). These disorientate the first person narrative, especially since the question is both proposed by, and responded to by the Faun itself: “Que non!” (Mallarmé 14) A similar vocal disorientation appears when the Faun appeals to “bords siciliens d’un calme marécage…CONTEZ”, replying with “Que je coupais ici les creux roseaux domtés” (Mallarmé 23-26). The italics mark a new voice, immediately suggesting the response of the subject who is called upon, however this again responds with the Faun’s experiences. The reply begins with “Que”, as though the verb “contez” is not an imperative but part of the entire sentence “O bords siciliens d’un calme marécage…CONTEZ que je coupais…” (Mallarmé 23-26). The ungrammaticality of the verb for the subject “Ô bords siciliens” dismisses this possibility, however the disorientation remains. The imperative calls upon the voice of a different subject, but this returns as the narrator’s voice and experiences. This is again the case when the Faun speaks “Ô nymphes, regonflons des SOUVENIRS divers”, and replies with “Mon oeil, trouant les joncs, dardait chaque encolure/Immortelle” (Mallarmé 62-65). The memories the Faun calls upon the nymph to expand upon are those personal to the narrator “Mon crime, c’est d’avoir, gai de vaincre ces peurs…” (Mallarmé 82). Therefore, they represent another case where the expected voice of the nymphs is instead that of the narrator. Within the “egologve” form, the voices are merged with the Faun’s.  This poly-vocal confusion can be best summarised by Debussy’s adaptation Prelude á L’Apres- Midi d’un Faun, where the Faun’s melodic leitmotif is developed in different instrumental voices, from the flute to the clarinet.  In this way, the motifs blur the structure into one indistinguishable whole: “if we try…to define three main divisions – beginning, middle, and end, or ABA’ – we are likely to disagree with each other and fall into misunderstandings.” (Austin 71).  A similar comparison can be drawn to distinguishing the voices in L’Apres-midi d’un Faun. 
This has obvious ties with the The Waste Land, a work as Mayer writes, is not shaped “through vision itself but through voices” (Mayer 81). Eliot’s original title for the poem, ‘He do the Police in different Voices’ establishes and builds the work on the idea of many voices united in one (Bradbrook 10). Similar to Mallarmé’s interwoven voices, these present themselves as separate from one another through typography and punctuation:
I will show you fear in a handful of dust.
                          Frisch weht der Wind
                          Der Heimat zu
                          Mein Irisch Kind
                          Wo weilest du?
‘You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
‘They called me the hyacinth girl.’                      (Eliot 54) 
The notable comparison with Mallarmé is that despite these voices being distinct, they are united in one consciousness. Eliot suggests at a central character in Tiresias, described in the notes to The Waste Land as “the most important personage in the poem, uniting all the rest.” As the Faun’s consciousness embodies the voices and memories of the nymphs in L’Apres- Midi d’un Faun, Tiresias embodies the voices of every character of The Waste Land: “Just as the one-eyed merchant, seller of currants, melts into the Phoenician Sailor…so all the women are one woman, and the two sexes meet in Tiresias” (Eliot 72). This note holds the same function as Mallarmé’s ‘LE FAUN’, establishing a unity to the text whilst accommodating a series of passing and disorientating voices. However, this is exaggerated in Eliot in the range and frequency of different voices. As the above passage demonstrates, Eliot’s voices speak German, Latin, Italian and French, and are rarely introduced or called upon by name. Thus, the interwoven memories and experiences of voices in L’Apres-Midi d’un Faun is exaggerated into the web of unknown voices in The Waste Land. 
This leads to a further point of Mallarmé’s difficulty, in his creation of temporal ambiguity. As Mallarmé writes in La Musique et Les Lettres, “Tout l’acte disponible, á jamais et seulement, reste de saisir les rapports, entre temps, rares ou multipliés” (Mallarmé 68), and therefore he prescribes that “the aim of all creative acts is to seize the links between times or temporalities” (McCombie 33). These temporal links are illustrated through the united states of dreaming, reflecting and remembering throughout L’Apres-Midi d’un Faun. These blur into one another, and in doing so create a timeless simultaneity to the events of the poem. This is illustrated by the first line “Ces nymphes, je les veux perpétuer” (Mallarmé 1), and its English translation “These nymphs, I’d love to make them linger on” (Blackmore 1). The use of the verb perpétuer and its translation “linger on” in English is ambiguous firstly in meaning: it could mean “bring them back in the flesh, prolong them in his memory, perpetuate them in art, perpetuate them in offspring” (Cohn 14). Each of these is built upon a different temporality related to the nymphs, “bring them back in the flesh” is taking them from the past, “prolong them in his memory” keeping them in the present, “perpetuate them in art” and “perpetuate them in offspring” expressing a wish for them in the future (Cohn 14). These arise from perpetuate, a continual action, being paired with a past tense form, resulting in the unusual construction in the English translation “I’d love to make them linger on”. Thus, a combination of past and present tenses creates a sense of ambiguity. This is furthered by the use of unexpected tenses, firstly appearing after the call to “Réfléchissons…” (Mallarmé 8). This verb is typically associated with looking back, an action “typically involving influence from one’s past life and experiences” (OED) and therefore conventionally triggering the past tense.  Instead of this, the construction is completed with the present tense: “ou si les femmes dont tu gloses/Figurent un souhait de tes sens fabuleux!” (Mallarmé 8-9). The section preceding “Réfléchissons…” is in the past tense,“Bois mêmes, prouve, hélas! que bien seul je m’offrais” (Mallarmé 6). Thus, the act of reflection takes the poem away from the expected past and into the present, subverting the conventional tenses in these constructions. This temporal confusion is epitomised by the final line of the poem: “Couple, adieu; je vais voir l’ombre que tu devins” (Mallarmé 110), and its English translation “ Both of you,/ farewell; I’m going to see the shadow you became.” (Blackmore 110). In a similar manner to the opening line of the poem, this combines two tenses in an unusual way. The future tense “je vais voir” is followed by the past construction “l’ombre que tu devins”, and addressed to the “Couple” who have already passed into a shadow (Mallarmé 110).  Thus, the present of the “Couple” is in the past, and this is a past the Faun will return to in the future. The temporal ambiguity arises from the unexpected past and present merging, creating the dream-like ambiguity of the poem. 
This temporal ambiguity is also a key component of The Waste Land and its difficulty. Eliot’s poem, as Williamson writes, is “free[] from time limits and space limits” (Williamson 154), and consists, as Litz writes, of an “obsessive counterpointing of past and present”. (Litz 137). This is notable from the alternation between tenses at the start of each section: “The Burial of the Dead” begins in present tense, “A Game of Chess” in past tense, “The Fire Sermon” present, “Death by Water” past, and the final “What the Thunder Said” section in present. Thus, a similar kind of temporal merging is created. A comparable sentence to Mallarmé’s “Both of you/farewell; I’m going to see the shadow you became” (Blackmore 110), exists in “What the Thunder Said”: “He who was living is now dead/ We who were living are now dying/With a little patience” (Eliot 328-330). As Mallarmé is addressing those who have already passed, Eliot is creating the voice of those who have already passed.  This is the voice of the “living dead” (Williamson 155), and as the past dead are given a place in the present, the present too is given a position in the past. This is exaggerated further in the numerous allusions to historical literature and figures in The Waste Land. These ultimately all exist in the present, the words of dead poets and figures are resurrected to create the palimpsest poem. The aforementioned “mere spectator and not indeed a ‘character’” (Eliot 72) Tiresias is not brought into the poem as a living character, but one who has returned from the dead: “I Tiresias have foresuffered all…And walked among the lowest of the dead” (Eliot 243-246). This forms a link to Eliot’s critical writing where he writes that “You cannot value [the poet] alone; you must set him, for contrast and comparison, among the dead” (Eliot 2). This is a great departure from Mallarmé’s combination of past and present to create the dreamlike temporality in L’Apres-midi d’un Faun.  However, it is built upon the same premise, and ultimately gives the work a similar Mallarméan dream-like quality –  The Waste Land is described as a “nightmare of visions” (Longenbach 161). 
This leads to the final point of difficulty, and perhaps the most prominent of Mallarmé’s style: musical allusion. Debussy’s interpretation Prelude L’Apres-Midi D’un Faun, Nijinsky’s ballet Afternoon of a Faun and Florence’s (comically titled) Afternoon of a Prawn are a few of the musical works inspired by Mallarmé’s poem. His work is primarily situated on the musicality of language, to the extent that Symons writes, “Carry the theories of Mallarmé to a practical conclusion, multiply his powers in a direct ratio, and you have Wagner.” (Symons 61). This underlies the difficulty in extracting meaning from Mallarmé: a large part is motivated by the sounds of words rather than their semantics. As Mallarmé famously writes in La Musique et les Lettres, “que la Musique et les Lettres sont la face alternative ici élargie vers l’obscur; scintellante la, avec certitude, d’un phénomene, le seul, je l’appelai, l’Idée” (Mallarmé 69). This can be seen in the many passages of L’Apres-Midi d’un Faun which are based on musicality and rhythm, as towards the beginning of the poem: “Mon doute, amas de nuit ancienne, s’achève/En maint rameau subtil, qui, demeuré les vrais” (Mallarmé 4-5). In this, the balance of the alliteration on “doute”,“de” and “ancienne”, “s’achève” on the first line creates a metric pattern, along with the musical comma which sub-divides this into smaller segments of 2-6-2 syllables. The symmetry and rhythmic repetition in this line is highly musical, and also accounts for the syntactically difficult structure. The vowel sounds are also a frequent motivator for Mallarmé’s semantics, where high vowel sounds such as in “Si clair” are contrasted with low sounds “Assoupi de sommeil” (Mallarmé 2, 4), something again mirrored in Debussy’s interpretation of high flute with low cello (Cohn 15). 
In Eliot’s lecture The Music of Poetry, he describes a similar relationship between music and poetry to Mallarmé: “the sound of a poem is as much an abstraction as the sense” (Eliot 19). He describes an experience in poetry “not peculiar to [him]self”, where a poem or passage “may tend to realise itself first as a particular rhythm before it reaches expression in words, and that this idea may bring to birth the idea and the image” (Eliot 28). An example of this is the rhythmic line “the surface of blackened river is a face that sweats with tears”, listed as a potential line for The Waste Land before Ezra Pound recommends it for a different poem Song to the Opherian (Bradbrook 21). The Waste Land also features a great deal of more self-conscious musical references.   This can be seen in the many song and opera references as listed in the notes: from the song in The Vicar of Wakefield  “When lovely woman stoops to folly…” (Eliot 253), to the passage from Tristan und Isolde “Frisch weht der Wind/Der Heimat zu/Mein Irisch Kind,/Wo weilest du?” (Eliot 31-4), and the Shakesepherian Rag, “O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag” (Eliot 128). Alongside this, is the frequent use of onomatopoeic repetition, “Twit twit twit/ jug jug jug jug jug jug”, and “Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop” (Eliot 358). These are particularly similar to Mallarmé’s musicality in their alternation of high vowel sounds /?/ with lower /?/ sounds, foregrounding musicality over meaning in a similarly difficult way. 
Having outlined the difficulties running parallel in both works, it is useful to outline how Mallarmé’s ideas critically coincide with Eliot’s. Mallarmé’s theory of language is situated around suggestion, one closely allied with allusion: “Speaking has to do with the reality of things only commercially: in literature, it contents itself with making an allusion to them or with abstracting their quality that some idea will incorporate” (Blanchot 33). This ultimately leads to a usage of language which is granted an impersonal character, it “does not imply anyone who expresses it, or anyone who hears it: it speaks itself and writes itself.” (Blanchot 41). This autonomous language thus has the effect of distancing a work from its writer, and this leads to Eliot. In his 1919 essay Tradition and the Individual Talent Eliot outlines the theory of depersonalisation and ‘impersonal poetry’: “The emotion of art is impersonal. And the poet cannot reach this impersonality without surrendering himself wholly to the work to be done” (Eliot 961). As Mallarmé surrenders his work to an autonomous language, he is extracting his own personality from the work, and thus fulfilling Eliot’s idea “that the poet has, not a “personality” to express, but a particular medium” (Eliot 960). Eliot’s direct reflection on critical difficulty also shares a resemblance with Mallarmé: “We can only say that it appears likely that poets in our civilization, as it exists at present, must be difficult… The poet must become more and more comprehensive, more allusive, more indirect, in order to force, to dislocate if necessary, language into his meaning.” (Eliot 976). The focus on allusion and suggestion, and a “disloc[ation]” of language from its conventional usage unites both the critical concerns of Mallarmé and Eliot. Thus, Mallarmé’s ideas can not only be traced into The Waste Land, but also into the critical discussion in Eliot’s Tradition and the Individual Talent and The Metaphysical Poets. 
Thus, overall Mallarmé’ and Eliot’s difficulty is built upon the same principles and techniques. However, this is not to say that the difficulty created by each is the same: despite these traits coinciding with one another, they are ultimately used to make very different texts. The aspects of difficulty discussed are exaggerated in Eliot to a point where they are self-consciously referred to: the poem outlines its “broken images” from the beginning (Eliot 22), defines its “melt[ing]” of voices into one another (Eliot 72), describes the state of temporal ambiguity in the characters who are “neither/Living nor dead” (Eliot 40) and outright names the songs which are featured in its entirety. This is a shift which Bowie describes as “a major epistemological upheaval”, where “difficulty is the very life of the poem” (Bowie 4). This is largely the result of the element which sets Mallarmé and Eliot apart: the addition of “new explanatory tools”, namely Eliot’s notes to The Waste Land (Bowie 4).  These unravel the myriad of references and allusions, and begin by self-consciously addressing the text’s difficulty: “Miss Weston’s book will elucidate the difficulties of the poem much better than my notes can do; and I recommend it…to any who think such elucidation of the poem worth the trouble” (Eliot 70). Bowie describes this having the effect for the reader in which “we have been taken from a world in which the decipherer could confidently envisage solutions and anticipate the gratifying sensations of discovery even during the early stages of his quest” (Bowie 1) The ability of these notes to actually decipher The Waste Land is still subject to debate, however their popularity is interesting. Eliot describes this himself in The Frontiers of Criticism, where the notes “have had almost greater popularity than the poem itself” and “now they can never be unstuck” (Eliot 533). This marks almost a justification for difficulty, a deconstruction of the idea that (whether ironic or not) the poet wants the reader to understand their work. This sentiment refers back to Mallarmé’s sentiment which dispels the idea of the difficult elitist poet, “Il doit y avoir quelque chose d’occulte au fond de tous, je crois décidément á quelque chose d’abscons, signifiant fermé et cache, qui habite le commun” (Mallarmé 229-230). 
Mallarmé and Eliot share similarities both in their reputations, components of their difficulty, and critical writing. Sharing the epithet ‘difficult’ has brought with it the more disparaging associations of “ivory tower poet” (Catani 1), and contributors to “a gratuitous cult of indirectness” (Bowie 147). However, it also brings popularity. As Jarrell writes, and to his frustration, “when I went from bookstore to bookstore in Paris, hunting for Corbiére, I began to feel a sense of mocking frustration at the poems by Mallarmé, letters by Mallarmé, letters to Mallarmé, biographies of, essays on, and homage to Mallarmé” (Jarrell 18). The difficulty associated with Eliot and Mallarmé, and which is manifested in their work as shown above, is no deterrent from their acclaim popularly and critically. The myths of Mallarmé and Eliot’s exile from society are shown to be exactly that, and instead are flagships that difficulty is valuable. This signals a return to Geoffrey Hill, one of the more modern poets to inherit the ‘difficult’ epithet. In the same Paris Review interview, he brings difficulty in a political placement, where he writes that “since people generally go on from this to talk about elitism versus democracy, I would add that genuinely difficult art is truly democratic. And that tyranny requires simplification” (Hill). In a modern age recently awarded its word-of-the-year epithet ‘post-truth’ (Oxford Dictionaries), the potential dangers of simplicity seem more relevant than ever. Mallarmé and Eliot’s focus on difficulty continuing through Geoffrey Hill is a reminder of difficulty’s stay over time, and its continual ability to “achieve[] greatness by its honesty” (Cox 17). 











